## bs255 Key Exchange and Signatures

- Version: 0.0.1
- Author: Yawning Angel

### Introduction

This document specifies the bs255 key exchange and signature scheme,
that is built on top of the ristretto255 prime-order group as specified
in [RFC9496] and TupleHash(XOF) as specified in NIST [SP 800-185].

Design goals:

- Equivalent security to [X25519] and [Ed25519].
- As edge-case free as possible, with explicit specified behavior.
- Mandatory domain separation (an empty domain separator is allowed).
- Deterministic or non-deterministic ("added entropy") signatures.
- "Easy" to implement correctly given an existing ristretto255 and
  scalar field library.

### Notation and Conventions Used in This Document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
14 [RFC2119]/[RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals,
as shown here.

A byte is an 8-bit entity (also known as "octet"), and a byte string is
an ordered sequence of bytes. An N-byte string is a byte string of N
bytes in length.

`a || b` denotes (bit-)string a concatenated with (bit-)string b.

`G` is the canonical generator for the ristretto255 prime-order group.

`l` is the order of the ristretto255 prime-order group.

`?` in pseudo-code denotes propagating errors upward to the caller,
a la crab-lang (ie: `res = fn()?` means "res is result of fn() on
success, otherwise return the error").

### Encoding, Decoding and Other Operations

`b = EncodeScalar(s)` encodes a scalar value in the range `0 <= s < l`
as a little-endian 32-byte string.  The value MUST be encoded in
canonical (fully-reduced) form.

`s = DecodeScalar(b)` decodes a 32-byte string by interpreting it
as a 256-bit little-endian integer.  Strings that represent
non-canonical encodings of a scalar (`s >= l`) MUST be rejected as
invalid, and the calling procedure MUST be aborted.

`s = DecodeWideScalar(b)` decodes a 64-byte string by interpreting it
as a 512-bit little-endian integer, and reducing the value modulo `l`.

`b = EncodeElement(E)` encodes a ristretto255 element to a 32-byte
string as specified in RFC9496.

`E = DecodeElement(b)` decodes a ristretto255 element from a 32-byte
string as specified in RFC9496.  Any failures MUST result in the
calling procedure being aborted.

`isZero = ConstantTimeScalarIsZero(s)` returns `true` iff `s` is `0`, in
constant-time.

`isIdentity = ElementIsIdentity(E)` returns `true` iff `E` is the
ristretto255 identity element.

`b = GetEntropy(L)` returns L-bits of cryptographically strong entropy.

`b = TupleHash128(X, L, S)` returns the L-bit TupleHash128 digest of
the tuple `X` with customization string `S` as in NIST SP 800-185.

`xof = TupleHashXOF128(X, S)` returns a TupleHashXOF128 instance ready
for reading, initialized with the tuple `X` and customization string
`S` as in NIST SP 800-185.

`b = ReadXOF(xof, L)` returns the next L-bits from a XOF instance.

`s = SampleNonZeroScalar(xof)` samples a non-zero scalar from a XOF
instance via the following procedure:

```
  SampleNonZeroScalar(xof):
    for i = 0; i < 3; i = i + 1:
      bytes_wide = ReadXOF(xof, 512)
      s = DecodeWideScalar(bytes_wide)
      if ConstantTimeScalarIsZero(s) == false:
        return s
    return FAIL
```

As the odds of `s` being `0` is cryptographically insignificant,
implementations MAY use the following procedure instead:

```
  SampleNonZeroScalar(xof):
    bytes_wide = ReadXOF(xof, 512)
    s = DecodeWideScalar(bytes_wide)
    if ConstantTimeScalarIsZero(s) == true:
      return FAIL
    return s
```

The choice of implementation strategy has no impact on the definition
of a valid signature.  Until a test vector that can trigger the failure
is discovered, all test vectors will produce identical output with
either implementation option.  Regardless of which implementation is
chosen, TupleHashXOF128 MUST be used as the PRF.

### Keys

Both private and public keys are represented by an opaque 32-byte
strings.  It is RECOMMENDED that implementations decode the opaque
representation once and operate on the internal representations
to save repeated decode operations.  If an implementation chooses
to do this, the internal representation SHOULD be made opaque to the
caller, for example by wrapping them in types.

#### Private keys

Private keys are a 32-byte string, that is expanded via TupleHash128,
in a similar manner to Ed25519 "seeds".

`(sc, n) = ExpandPrivateKey(key)` expands a private key into the
internal representation consisting of a ristretto255 scalar `sc`, and a
32-byte static nonce `n` via the following procedure:

```
  ExpandPrivateKey(key):
    b = TupleHash128((key), 768, "bs255/v0:ExpandPrivateKey")
    sc = DecodeWideScalar(b[0:64])
    if ConstantTimeScalarIsZero(sc) == true:
      return FAIL
    n = b[64:96]
    return (sc, n)
```

It is RECOMMENDED that implementations also derive the corresponding
public key at key generation time (both the binary representation, and
internal representation) as they are required for signing and
verification.  If this is done, the corresponding values MUST be
tightly coupled to the corresponding private key (eg: by including
them in the private key type).

#### Public keys

Public keys are a 32-byte string, that is a canonical encoding of a
ristretto255 group element, excluding the identity element.

`P = DecodePublicKey(key)` decodes a public key into the internal
representation consisting of a ristretto255 group element via the
following procedure:

```
  DecodePublicKey(key):
    P = DecodeElement(key)?
    if ElementIsIdentity(P) == true:
      return FAIL
    return P
```

As ristretto255 group elements only have one canonical encoding of the
identity element, implementations MAY choose to reject the binary
encoded identity element prior to decoding.

`public_key = DerivePublicKey(key)` derives the public key
corresponding to a private key via the following procedure:

```
  DerivePublicKey(key):
    (sc, n) = ExpandPrivateKey(key)?
    P = G * sc
    return EncodeElement(P)
```

### Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange

`shared_secret = DH(domain_sep, private_key, public_key)` performs
a Diffie-Hellman key exchange with domain separated shared secrets via
the following procedure:

```
  DH(domain_sep, private_key, public_key):
    (sc, n) = ExpandPrivateKey(private_key)?
    P = DecodePublicKey(public_key)?
    E = P * sc
    b = EncodeElement(E)
    return TupleHash128((domain_sep, b), 256, "bs255/v0:DiffieHellman")
```

As well-formed private and public keys exclude the ristretto255
identity element, contributory behavior is guaranteed in the output of
a successful execution of the exchange.

It may be tempting to skip the final TupleHash in certain cases, such
as when the output will be passed immediately into another PRF, however
this is NOT RECOMMENDED.

### Signatures

The bs255 signature scheme is an implementation of Schnorr signatures,
largely inspired by the [BIP-0340] and [sr25519] designs.  Signatures
are represented as opaque 64-byte strings that consists of the
concatenation of the binary encodings of a ristretto255 group element
and scalar.

#### Signing

`sig = Sign(private_key, domain_sep, message, is_deterministic)` returns
a signature made with the provided private key, domain separator and
message.  If `is_deterministic` is true, the signature will be
deterministic.

```
  Sign(private_key, domain_sep, message, is_deterministic):
    (sc, n) = ExpandPrivateKey(private_key)?
    P = G * sc
    bytes_P = EncodeElement(P)

    bytes_rand = ""
    if is_deterministic == false:
      bytes_rand = GetEntropy(256)?

    // Generate the per-signature nonce (k).
    xof = TupleHashXOF128(
      (n, bytes_rand, domain_sep, bytes_P, message),
      "bs255/v0:SignNonce",
    )
    k = SampleNonZeroScalar(xof)?

    R = G * k
    bytes_R = EncodeElement(R)

    // Generate the challenge scalar (e).
    bytes_e = TupleHash128(
      (domain_sep, bytes_R, bytes_P, message),
      512,
      "bs255/v0:SignChallenge",
    )
    e = DecodeWideScalar(bytes_e)

    // Let sig = bytes(R) || bytes((k + e * sc) mod l).
    s = (k + (e * sc)) % l
    sig = bytes_R || EncodeScalar(s)

    // Verify the newly created signature.
    if Verify(bytes_P, domain_sep, message, sig) == false:
      return FAIL

    return sig
```

The final re-verification of the freshly created signature improves
resilience against certain classes of fault attacks and is strongly
RECOMMENDED.  While NOT RECOMMENDED, implementations MAY skip the
final check if required.

There are other ways to generate `k` which are valid, and may in fact
be required to implementing more complex schemes such as (threshold)
multi-signatures.  However for the simple "vanilla" signing case,
implementations MUST use the method that is specified.

#### Verification

`is_valid = Verify(public_key, domain_sep, message, signature)` returns
true if the provided signature is a valid signature over the domain
separator and message by the public key.

```
  Verify(public_key, domain_sep, message, signature):
    P = DecodeElement(public_key)?

    if len(signature) != 64:
      return FAIL
    bytes_R = signature[0:32]
    bytes_s = signature[32:64]

    // Decode the signature into (R, s) where:
    // - R is a non-identity canonically encoded ristretto255 element.
    // - s is a canonically encoded ristretto255 scalar.
    R = DecodeElement(bytes_R)?
    if ElementIsIdentity(R) == true:
      return FAIL
    s = DecodeScalar(bytes_s)?

    // Re-compute the challenge scalar (e).
    bytes_e = TupleHash128(
      (domain_sep, bytes_R, public_key, message),
      512,
      "bs255/v0:SignChallenge",
    )
    e = DecodeWideScalar(bytes_e)

    // Let R_check = G * s - P * e
    //
    // Note: It is unnecessary to verify if R_check is the ristretto255
    // identity element as R is guaranteed not to be.
    R_check = G * s - P * e

    // Signature is valid if R_check == R.
    if R_check != R:
      return FAIL

    return true
```

### Implementation Considerations

It is possible to reduce the number of Keccak calls made for the
various operations by pre-computing the initial TupleHash(XOF) states,
as the parameters used for initialization are fixed, and doing a copy
is typically faster than initializing TupleHash.

This document presents a byte-oriented interface, however it is
possible and valid for domain separators and messages to be
bit-strings, however this will always be OPTIONAL and NOT RECOMMENDED
as bit-oriented implementations of TupleHash(XOF) are likely to be
rare.

### Designer Commentary

Explicitly defining Diffie-Hellman and specifying that the behavior
is to be passed through a PRF was done to try to bring domain
separation into the primitive.  Additionally, there has been an
open question in certain circles about the safety of using Ed25519
signing keys for X25519, which this hopefully side-steps.

The decision to omit providing an equivalent to Ed25519ph is
deliberate, as it is redundant given that signatures take a mandatory
domain separator.

The choice of TupleHash(XOF) was motivated by a combination of the
primitive being blessed by NIST, it being a good fit for the problem,
emerging dedicated hardware support for Keccak, and the existence of
vectorized parallel implementations.

The elements in the tuple used to generate the signature challenge is
flexible due to the use of TupleHash.  While other orderings would
allow for more pre-computation in certain scenarios, the gains are either
minimal, or can be designed around by the caller (eg: by pre-hashing
the message), so the ordering was not optimized around any particular
use-case.

How to handle exceptional cases that occur with cryptographically
insignificant probabilities appears to be unsettled.  The choice of
"rejection sampling with a limit on retries OR immediate failure"
was selected as those are the easiest options to implement.  If a test
vector for the exceptional case is found, the behavior will likely be
made more concrete.

### Acknowledgements

Special thanks to Deirdre Connolly, Filippo Valsorda, and Jack Grigg
for valuable feedback, commentary, and suggestions while drafting
this document.

As the saying goes, this design stands on the shoulders of giants, and
owes its existence to the vast body of prior work that was drawn upon.

[RFC9496]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9496.html
[SP 800-185]: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-185
[X25519]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7748
[Ed25519]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8032
[RFC2119]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119
[RFC8174]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174
[BIP-0340]: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0340.mediawiki
[sr25519]: https://github.com/w3f/schnorrkel
